>> We used to think that what
we thought was the best way
to play the game.
The thinking mind,
and then science,
which is its child, and then
technology, which is its child,
would take and reorganize
everything in such a way
that we would be happy, free
of suffering, joyful, peaceful.
Are you?
Did it work?
And if you look at the
world at this moment,
it's really hard not to see a
fear-driven social structure.
And yet what we
touched certainly
in the '60s was a sense of
a love-driven, if you will,
social structure.
But what happened in the '60s?
Well, we were very
naive, and we assumed
that once we saw this
incredible power of love, which
had to do with egalitarian
and compassionate
human relationships,
we tasted that,
and we felt its inherent
power so strongly.
We just assumed everything
would fall before it.
And the minstrels that
Bob Dylan and the Grateful
Dead and the Rolling
Stones and, on and on,
they carried the message.
So suddenly, 10 and
12 and 14-year-olds
were sitting with
their earphones
on, listening to
the words coming out
of people who were playing
with planes of consciousness.
And the minute you start to
have the perspective of playing
simultaneously with more than
one plane of consciousness,
you are free of the oppressive
power of any institution
on any one plane.
In other words, the Pentagon
is relatively real rather
than absolutely real.
But what, in fact, happened in
the '60s was that the people
that hadn't been touched by
that direct experience of unity,
of interdependency, and who
were stuck in their separateness
and, thus, frightened
and, therefore,
were collecting power and
material power and worldly
power in order to fend
off the anxiety generated
by their fear--
and, ultimately,
to fend off death--
and those people
looked around, and they
saw an emerging
consciousness that
undercut the social institutions
that empowered them.
And they got frightened.
And what fear leads
to is fanaticism.
We can't hear anybody else.
You get caught in
a belief system.
And the human
psyche, unless it has
evolved to be resting
simultaneously
in the plane of emptiness
where there is no time
and there's no space and
nothing's coming and nothing's
going, chaos and
anarchy are very scary.
Because in chaos and anarchy,
the worst that can happen
is you could die.
And if you're a philosophical
materialist, that's a drag.
If you're a mystic, it's
just very interesting.
If you're a high enough mystic,
it's just another moment.
So in a way, that's
why I, too, had
a difficult time with the
word "revolution" because I've
always pitted revolution, which
is something against something,
to evolution, which is something
which evolves into something,
and then it embraces everything
into itself as it evolves.
But I could see it as
revolution from the unconscious
into the conscious.
And as far as the word
"hope," I have really
lived for a number of years
now with Trungpa Rinpoche's
teaching, which he said,
"You have to stand halfway
between hope and hopelessness."
See, I'm talking now to you
about what myths you and I
have to live with in order to be
effective players in the game.
What can we get from our
spiritual work all these years?
Our inner work, our development
work, our personality work.
What can we get now that
as we hear-- once again,
as we heard in the '60s--
a kind of liquid possibility
that the kind of dream
or vision we have
deep in our being
that there can be
social structures that
are compassionate?
They can be social
structures which are just,
where there is real equity.
Dreams that we can
hear each other
and celebrate ethnic diversity
instead of being threatened
by it; dreams that we can
walk lightly on the earth;
dreams that we can
just hear each other--
the dream that the participant
in the social structure
can have a balance
within their being,
between their preoccupation
with their own individuality
and their membership in the
community that is concerned
with the common good--
common good of the earth
and species, common good
of species with each
other and with themselves.